readme.md, before:

# Substrate Validator Set

A Substrate pallet to add/remove validators in Substrate-based PoA networks.

## Usage

* Add the module's dependency in the `Cargo.toml` of your runtime directory. Make sure to enter the correct path or git url of the pallet as per your setup.

```toml
[dependencies.substrate_validator_set]
package = 'substrate-validator-set'
git = 'https://github.com/gautamdhameja/substrate-validator-set.git'
default-features = false
```

* Make sure that you also have the Substrate [session pallet](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/tree/master/frame/session) as part of your runtime. This is because the validator-set pallet is based on the session pallet.

* Declare the pallet in your `runtime/src/lib.rs`.

```rust
pub use validatorset;

impl validatorset::Trait for Runtime {
	type Event = Event;
}
```

* Also, declare the session pallet in  your `runtime/src/lib.rs`. The type configuration of session pallet would depend on the ValidatorSet pallet as shown below.

```rust
impl session::Trait for Runtime {
	type SessionHandler = <opaque::SessionKeys as OpaqueKeys>::KeyTypeIdProviders;
	type ShouldEndSession = ValidatorSet;
	type SessionManager = ValidatorSet;
	type Event = Event;
	type Keys = opaque::SessionKeys;
	type ValidatorId = <Self as system::Trait>::AccountId;
	type ValidatorIdOf = validatorset::ValidatorOf<Self>;
	type DisabledValidatorsThreshold = ();
}
```

* Add both `session` and `validatorset` pallets in `construct_runtime` macro. **Make sure to add them before `Aura` and `Grandpa` pallets.**

```rust
construct_runtime!(
	pub enum Runtime where
		Block = Block,
		NodeBlock = opaque::Block,
		UncheckedExtrinsic = UncheckedExtrinsic
	{
		...
		Session: session::{Module, Call, Storage, Event, Config<T>},
		ValidatorSet: validatorset::{Module, Call, Storage, Event<T>, Config<T>},
		Aura: aura::{Module, Config<T>, Inherent(Timestamp)},
		Grandpa: grandpa::{Module, Call, Storage, Config, Event},
        ...
        ...
	}
);
```

* Add genesis config for `session` and `validatorset` pallets and update it for `Aura` and `Grandpa` pallets. Because the validators are provided by the `session` pallet, we do not initialize them explicitly in `Aura` and `Grandpa` pallets.

```rust
validatorset: Some(ValidatorSetConfig {
	validators: initial_authorities.iter().map(|x| x.0.clone()).collect::<Vec<_>>(),
}),
session: Some(SessionConfig {
	keys: initial_authorities.iter().map(|x| {
		(x.0.clone(), session_keys(x.1.clone(), x.2.clone()))
	}).collect::<Vec<_>>(),
}),
aura: Some(AuraConfig {
	authorities: vec![],
}),
grandpa: Some(GrandpaConfig {
   	authorities: vec![],
}),
```

* Make sure you have the same number and order of session keys for your runtime. First in `runtime/src/lib.rs`:

```rust
pub struct SessionKeys {
	pub grandpa: Grandpa,
	pub aura: Aura,
}
```

* And then in `src/chain_spec.rs`:

```rust
fn session_keys(
	grandpa: GrandpaId,
	aura: AuraId,
) -> SessionKeys {
	SessionKeys { grandpa, aura }
}

pub fn get_authority_keys_from_seed(seed: &str) -> (
	AccountId,
	GrandpaId,
	AuraId
) {
	(
		get_account_id_from_seed::<sr25519::Public>(seed),
		get_from_seed::<GrandpaId>(seed),
		get_from_seed::<AuraId>(seed)
	)
}
```

* `cargo build --release` and then `cargo run --release -- --dev`

## Sample

The usage of this pallet are demonstrated in the [Substrate permissioning sample](https://github.com/gautamdhameja/substrate-permissioning).

## Disclaimer

This code not audited and reviewed for production use cases. You can expect bugs and security vulnerabilities. Do not use it as-is in real applications.

Commit message:

Added demo video link in readme.

readme.md, after:

# Substrate Validator Set

A Substrate pallet to add/remove validators in Substrate-based PoA networks.

## Demo

To see this pallet in action in a Substrate runtime, watch this video - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lIYxE-tOAdw

## Usage

* Add the module's dependency in the `Cargo.toml` of your runtime directory. Make sure to enter the correct path or git url of the pallet as per your setup.

```toml
[dependencies.substrate_validator_set]
package = 'substrate-validator-set'
git = 'https://github.com/gautamdhameja/substrate-validator-set.git'
default-features = false
```

* Make sure that you also have the Substrate [session pallet](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/tree/master/frame/session) as part of your runtime. This is because the validator-set pallet is based on the session pallet.

* Declare the pallet in your `runtime/src/lib.rs`.

```rust
pub use validatorset;

impl validatorset::Trait for Runtime {
	type Event = Event;
}
```

* Also, declare the session pallet in  your `runtime/src/lib.rs`. The type configuration of session pallet would depend on the ValidatorSet pallet as shown below.

```rust
impl session::Trait for Runtime {
	type SessionHandler = <opaque::SessionKeys as OpaqueKeys>::KeyTypeIdProviders;
	type ShouldEndSession = ValidatorSet;
	type SessionManager = ValidatorSet;
	type Event = Event;
	type Keys = opaque::SessionKeys;
	type ValidatorId = <Self as system::Trait>::AccountId;
	type ValidatorIdOf = validatorset::ValidatorOf<Self>;
	type DisabledValidatorsThreshold = ();
}
```

* Add both `session` and `validatorset` pallets in `construct_runtime` macro. **Make sure to add them before `Aura` and `Grandpa` pallets.**

```rust
construct_runtime!(
	pub enum Runtime where
		Block = Block,
		NodeBlock = opaque::Block,
		UncheckedExtrinsic = UncheckedExtrinsic
	{
		...
		Session: session::{Module, Call, Storage, Event, Config<T>},
		ValidatorSet: validatorset::{Module, Call, Storage, Event<T>, Config<T>},
		Aura: aura::{Module, Config<T>, Inherent(Timestamp)},
		Grandpa: grandpa::{Module, Call, Storage, Config, Event},
        ...
        ...
	}
);
```

* Add genesis config for `session` and `validatorset` pallets and update it for `Aura` and `Grandpa` pallets. Because the validators are provided by the `session` pallet, we do not initialize them explicitly in `Aura` and `Grandpa` pallets.

```rust
validatorset: Some(ValidatorSetConfig {
	validators: initial_authorities.iter().map(|x| x.0.clone()).collect::<Vec<_>>(),
}),
session: Some(SessionConfig {
	keys: initial_authorities.iter().map(|x| {
		(x.0.clone(), session_keys(x.1.clone(), x.2.clone()))
	}).collect::<Vec<_>>(),
}),
aura: Some(AuraConfig {
	authorities: vec![],
}),
grandpa: Some(GrandpaConfig {
   	authorities: vec![],
}),
```

* Make sure you have the same number and order of session keys for your runtime. First in `runtime/src/lib.rs`:

```rust
pub struct SessionKeys {
	pub grandpa: Grandpa,
	pub aura: Aura,
}
```

* And then in `src/chain_spec.rs`:

```rust
fn session_keys(
	grandpa: GrandpaId,
	aura: AuraId,
) -> SessionKeys {
	SessionKeys { grandpa, aura }
}

pub fn get_authority_keys_from_seed(seed: &str) -> (
	AccountId,
	GrandpaId,
	AuraId
) {
	(
		get_account_id_from_seed::<sr25519::Public>(seed),
		get_from_seed::<GrandpaId>(seed),
		get_from_seed::<AuraId>(seed)
	)
}
```

* `cargo build --release` and then `cargo run --release -- --dev`

## Sample

The usage of this pallet are demonstrated in the [Substrate permissioning sample](https://github.com/gautamdhameja/substrate-permissioning).

## Disclaimer

This code not audited and reviewed for production use cases. You can expect bugs and security vulnerabilities. Do not use it as-is in real applications.
